Jeff Dean on computer science education

I think it’s really important that we design the curriculum so that people who have not already been exposed to computing and programming are not at substantial disadvantages relative to people who have already been programming for years through high school or even middle school. If we don’t do this, we will disadvantage people from lower socioeconomic backgrounds that may not have had the same opportunities as others. Mentoring programs, separate introductory courses depending on how much exposure to programming people have had, etc. are good examples of things that can help.

In terms of the actual material, I think it’s really important to inspire people about the ways that solving computer science problems has an outsized influence in the world, and that computer science problems are at the heart of many different fields of science, engineering, and other disciplines. I have a talk I’ve been giving that's oriented around how machine learning will help us tackle some of the National Academy of Engineering Grand Challenge Problems for the 21st Century, which is a nice inspirational way to show people the potential impact. Example slides from a [long version given at the Deep Learning Indaba in South Africa](http://slides/1P-XePYvl6B--GjL5Omvm_0SJAglQECOj6sRXBK5Z0LM) last September, and a [much shorter version designed for a middle school and high school audience](http://slides/1S0ElyBq_Fd-0q5Z2BzwY1ohPUva1YpvJNHYNWPl0Aww) given at Castilleja School in January.

I’ve often felt that an introductory course where the whole semester/quarter was around diving into different sub-problems inside a technology that everyone uses would be a great way of helping people look at everyday objects and think about the software problems that underlie them. For example, for a whole semester, pick “the cell phone” as the topic, and discuss problems around finding location via GPS, encoding/decoding and backoff for communicating with cell towers or WiFi, photo processing for things like superresolution or NightSight, etc. Or pick a search engine, and discuss lots of things under the covers: indexing, query handling for boolean queries, spell correction, generating good suggestions given a few characters typed so far, deciding if a document is a good match for a query, etc. Or pick YouTube and discuss video encoding, identification of fringe material or hate speech, machine learning for video content analysis, dynamic resolution switching depending on network conditions, etc. Or pick Facebook or Twitter and discuss scaling issues, properties of social network connectivity structures, etc.